--- Page 1 ---
PLAN INDIA ©
PLAN
INTERNATIONAL
www.planindia.org

--- Page 2 ---
INTERNATIONAL
www.planindia.org
Special Thanks
Programme participant children, young people and their parents / caregivers.
Donors, friends and supporter of Plan International (India Chapter)
Governing Board Members of Plan International (India Chapter) for their guidance.
Smt. Rathi Vinay Jha, President, Plan International (India Chapter) Governing Board
Editorial Team
Senior Management Team, Plan International (India Chapter)
Meenakshi Bisht, Communication Coordinator, Plan International (India Chapter)
Design by
India Eventually Pvt. Ltd
Meenakshi Bisht, Communication Coordinator, Plan International (India Chapter)
Photo Courtesy
Vivek Kumar and Meenakshi Bisht
Note for Readers
The information and data contained in this Annual Report is for general information purposes only.
Team of Plan International (India Chapter) has taken all reasonable precautions to verify the
information contained in this publication. The photos used in this Report have the written consent.
The progress and impact data mentioned in this report are for the period April 2022 - March 2023.

--- Page 3 ---
Enabling Girls to Learn, Lead, Decide, and Thrive

--- Page 4 ---
LIST OF
ACRONYMS
AIDS Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome
ANM Auxiliary Nurse Midwife
ART Antiretroviral Therapy
ASHA Accredited Social Health Activist
AWW Anganwadi Workers
CMHO Chief Medical Health Officer
CNW Community Nutrition Workers
CPC Child Protection Committee
DM District Magistrate
EID Early Infant HIV Diagnosis
EPC Environment Protection Committee
FLW Frontline Workers
HIC Health Information Centres
HIV Human Immunodeficiency Virus
ICDS Integrated Child Development Services
IEC Information Education Communication
JOVT Job-oriented Vocational Training
NACO National AIDS Control Organisation
NCD Non-Communicable Diseases
NGO Non-Governmental Organisation
NHM National Health Mission
NITI Aayog National Institution for Transforming India
NRC Nutrition Rehabilitation Centres
PC & PNDT Pre-Conception and Pre-Natal Diagnostic Techniques
PE Peer Educator
PPTCT Prevention of Parent to Child Transmission
PRI Panchayati Raj Institution
SCPCR State Commission for Protection of Child Rights
SMC School Management Committees
WASH Water, Sanitation and Hygiene

--- Page 5 ---
TABLE OF CONTENT
Governing Board Members oO
Message from the Chair Emeritus
Message from the Chair & President
Message from the Executive Director
Our Journey
Our Purpose
Our Approach
Our Programme Reach
Our Impact
Plan India in Numbers
Strategic Thematic Priority 1: Inclusive and Quality Education
Strategic Thematic Priority 2: Youth and Household
Economic Security
Strategic Thematic Priority 3: Sexual and Reproductive
Health Rigths and Services and Maternal and Child Health
Strategic Thematic Priority 4: Safety for Girls and
Child Protection
Strategic Thematic Priority 5: Nutrition and Early Childhood
Development
Strategic Thematic Priority 6: Resilience in Emergencies
6 Plan India Impact Awards
Children’s Creativity Festival
International Day of the Girl Child(11 October)
From our Donors
Partners and Friends
Plan India in News
Awards and Recognitions
Financial Disclosure
List of Acronyms
About Plan International (India Chapter)
Oo oOo N OO
11
12
13
14
16
20
24
30
36
40
44
46
48
50
51
52
54
57
59
60

--- Page 6 ---
GOVERNING BOARD MEMBERS
Rathi ‘ivney Jha JVR Prasada Rao Madhukar Kamath
CHAIR & PRESIDENT | SECRETARY _ TREASURER
ss NeneeR Chak Shireen SS EMBER Atul Kirloskar
Madan B. Lokur Ajay Kaul Upma Chawdhry
Atul Dhawan
)

--- Page 7 ---
It is with great pleasure that | present to you the Annual Report for Plan India for the year 2022-23.
The remarkable journey of Plan India as it continues to make strides towards advancing India’s
Sustainable Development Goals and fostering awareness among children and women about their
rights fills me with deep pride and joy.
With a vision to promote children’s rights and foster gender equality for girls, Plan India has
diligently forged impactful partnerships and sustainable initiatives aimed at driving transformative
change within our society.
| extend my sincere appreciation to the dedicated members of the organisation and our esteemed
partner staff for their unwavering commitment and active engagement in furthering our shared
mission.
It is through these partnerships that we have been able to create meaningful and lasting impact, and
we remain committed to advancing this progress in the years to come, with your continued support.
| look forward to continuing the collaboration with Plan India in our shared mission to empower
children and girls, equipping them with the knowledge and opportunities they need to create a
promising future for themselves.
It is our collective aim to create a world where both girls and boys can enjoy equal rights,
contributing to a more equitable and inclusive society for all.
Sincerely,
Govind Nihalani
Chair Emeritus, Plan India

--- Page 8 ---
| am happy to introduce the Plan India Annual Report for the year 2022-23. This year there has
been significant progress made by Plan India in attaining the national development agenda through
its work under various thematic interventions.
Our commitment to early childhood development, inclusive and quality education, youth
empowerment, and the protection of children, along with dedicated efforts to promote sexual and
reproductive health rights for girls and young women, has yielded positive outcomes.
The report shows our determination in the pursuit of gender transformative initiatives, showcasing
the positive impact generated within our communities, with a particular emphasis on the lives of
children, girls, and young women.
| extend my compliments and gratitude to our local communities, parents, self-help groups,
grassroots NGOs, donors, and, most significantly, the children, adolescent girls, and boys who have
been steadfast in their support and belief in Plan India’s vision.
Our achievements are a result of our strong partnerships and collaborations with national and
state government institutions, non-governmental organisations, academic institutions, universities,
technical resource agencies, corporate social responsibility partners, and community-based
organisations.
Their unwavering support has been pivotal in helping us achieve our goals and drive our mission
forward. | offer my sincere congratulations to the entire Plan India team for their excellent
contributions throughout the year.
As we look ahead, | am confident of their continued commitment to advancing gender equality
and contributing to the nation’s development, thereby positively transforming the lives of our fellow
community members.
Sincerely,
Rathi Vinay Jha
President, Plan India Governing Board

--- Page 9 ---
When | first wrote to you in 2019, | spoke of my admiration for Plan International (India Chapter),
fondly referred to by many as Plan India, and its efforts as a leading Indian NGO committed to
promoting rights for children and girls from underprivileged families and communities.
This year, we have made new strides in our mission to support and uplift the lives of children,
particularly girls, from poor and underprivileged families. | am humbled to share that our community
development programs have created positive outcomes for more than 18.90 lakhs (1.80 million)
children, including girls, boys, young women, and men across 27 states of our country. We
implemented comprehensive strategies to ensure that more than 1,50,000 girls and boys from
underprivileged families gain access to quality education in government schools from pre-primary to
senior secondary levels.
We have worked collectively with government and community stakeholders to strengthen youth
economic empowerment by supporting 18,500 young women and men from urban slums and
villages with job-oriented vocational skills and job placement. Aligned with the Government's
adolescent and young health program, we have supported awareness and capacity building for
5,40,000 adolescent girls and boys, as well as, young women and men, to practice health seeking
behaviour and make well-informed decisions on their health and well-being. Furthermore, 90,000
girls and young women have been supported with information and linkages to the government’s
gender equality schemes and programs to protect them from all forms of violence, abuse and
exploitation. Through our integrated nutrition and early childhood development interventions, we
have positively impacted the lives of over 100,000 children. Our humanitarian relief efforts during
the year has benefitted nearly 75,000 disaster affected people and their families for meeting their
immediate needs of food, nutrition, hygiene and healthcare.
| extend my heartfelt gratitude to our invaluable donors, civil society partners, government
stakeholders and community champions of change for their unwavering support and meaningful
collaboration in achieving these important milestones. As we step into the next year, our passion
and determination remain unwavering in our pursuit to champion early childhood development.
Warm Regards,
Md <<
Mohammed Asif
Executive Director, Plan International (India Chapter)

--- Page 10 ---
OUR
JOURNEY
Plan India embraces the gender
transformative approach in
development and humanitarian
context expanding its ambition to
impact 20 million girls and young
women.
Plan India deepens its
programme focus on girls’
rights through its commitment
to 10 million girls learn, lead,
decide and thrive.
Plan India intensifies its work
under ‘One Plan’ agenda for
advancing child rights and
development in India.
Plan India establishes itself
as a leading humanitarian
actor responding to the relief
and rehabilitation during the
Asian Tsunami.
1996
Plan International (India
Chapter) registered as a
National Office for advancing
Child-Centered Community
Development in resource poor
districts of India.
10

--- Page 11 ---
ie : Gender Transformative Child-Centred
atin a m, Community Development approach in which
Hittite children, families and communities are
active and leading participants in their own
development. Gender Transformative means
ite addressing the root causes which keep
‘ girls away from many rights, benefits and
entitlements that society and the government
iN ensure for their holistic development. It
enhances the capacity of girls, boys, women
and men to identify the opportunities by
working together and creating lasting change
for themselves and their communities. Key
pillars of our approach are:
> PARTICIPATION
>>» INCLUSION
>>» PARTNERSHIPS
~~ >>» SUSTAINABILITY
ee
>>» ACCOUNTABILITY
11

--- Page 12 ---
OUR PROGRAMME REACH
Plan India’s presence in A | States
Safety for Girls & Nutrition & Early Resilience in
Child Protection Childhood Development Emergencies
@ Community Development Work @® Humanitarian Work @ Technical Assistance to Govt.
12

--- Page 13 ---
IMPACT ON CHILDREN,
ADOLESCENTS AND YOUTHS
89 Million) girls, boys, young women and men were
directly reached through various projects.
Under 6 year old children as programme Adolescent girls and young women
participants* of our Early Childhood as programme participants of our
Development initiatives. They acquired the Sexual and Reproduction Health Rights
knowledge, behaviours and skills to build initiatives. They became aware of the
relationships, learn, function effectively and harmful gender norms and stereotypes
independently and adapt to changes in the and accessed government health and
environment. wellbeing services.
3,17,167 18,716
Children, adolescents and youth as programme Young girls and boys under 24 years
participants of our Child Protection initiatives. were skilled through income generation
They were supported by building their life skills, initiatives and market linked vocational
resilience and self-protective capacities to help training and job placements.
them break the cycle of violence and reject
violence on children and girls.
4,08,136 16,774
School Children as programme participants of Persons affected by disasters supported
our Inclusive and Quality Education initiatives. with Humanitarian Relief and were able
They are on the path to complete at least 10 to build back better from the impact of
years of school education and learning. the natural disaster.
*Plan India prefers the use of the term “programme participant’ rather than “beneficiary” to count and report our outcomes.
13

--- Page 14 ---
7 "
Children, adolescent and youths from ZT states and Union Territories, 363 Districts, and 4960
Villages and Slums‘as programme participants (benefitted) from all grassfeots social development
and humanitarian projects implemented during the year (2022-23).
~
:“:
n7eo.en"" ” , ,* .
J rf .. lL,
e Atee ee.»*
:¥ : wte LSe “"."
. ; “Pr * vie" s"_*.
: "ees
° ign
ae -.
! b= e
q
050 Community-based groups of women, children, adolescents and young people leading
y grassroots-level programming in their respective villages and slums.
487 Young women and men supported
”
to become champions of development and social
d change in their villages and communities. vi )
25 073 Community members and volunteers trained in Child ie and Child Welfare.
9 ,
Partnerships & collaborations with National and State level.Government Institutions
for achieving National Development Goals / Sustainable Development Goals(SDG).
= Pe,
30 Corporate / Businesses to implement Corporate Social Responsibility projects.
SO
- ee ,
4 at
; , nA
3 weap! wv
~ J
+
.
- 4 - vf
~- 2 TM “
14 ) ie ‘

--- Page 15 ---
No text found on this page.


--- Page 16 ---
INCLUSIVE AND
QUALITY EDUCATION
sereneee eee
. .
—mw fl
—
Girls immersed in learning within safe and supportive school environment.
We have created a safe, protective and enabling learning
environment in more than 1,500 government schools where
Plan India has been implementing its inclusive and quality
education projects. Through our various interventions, we
have enabled children, particularly girls, to be enrolled,
retained and successfully complete their schooling.
We have built the capacities of school teachers,
strengthened the School Management Committees, and
worked closely with District Education Administrators to
achieve the goals of our Inclusive and Quality Education
programme. More than 1,000 primary, middle and secondary
schools were supported with improved teaching-learning
materials and school and classroom infrastructure.
16

--- Page 17 ---
Key
Achievements
oan
4,837 26,613 75,850
Children (under 6 Primary school children Children from Grades
years) enrolled in 310 received grade-wise 6 to 10 were provided
government Anganwadi supplementary education with tablets and/
Centres (ICDS Centres) on English, Maths & or access to digital
and pre-schools. Science for improved learning infrastructure in
foundational learning. classrooms for improved
learning outcomes.
S
1,199 1,465
Girls were enrolled in Children were provided
distance education for with career guidance and
secondary and senior- counselling.
secondary exams.
29,000
Children were supported
with career guidance.

--- Page 18 ---
Flagship Projects
1 Project Shikshantar
Shikshantar is Plan India’s remedial education programme for pupils with low learning attainment
in their respective class, especially girls. The programme focuses on Grades 6 to 10 where many
children temporarily fall behind in their studies. It builds their foundational learning and ensures that
such children receive accelerated learning on subjects where they find difficult to learn. The project
is implemented in 7 States - Bihar, Delhi, Jnarkhand, Maharashtra, Odisha, Tamil Nadu, and Uttar
Pradesh. During the reporting period, the project has supported 26,613 children as ‘programme
participants’. The post-intervention assessment of participating children indicates improvement in
their learning attainment - 22.9 percent girls moved from Grade D to Grade A, 37.7 percent girls
moved from Grade D to Grade B and 22.0 percent girls moved from Grade D to Grade C.
2) Project Digital Learning Centres
Our initiative focused on implementing an innovative and cost-effective digital education program,
aligning with the Government of India’s digital initiatives. The programme aimed to ensure the
continuity of education, particularly for adolescent girls, and it benefitted a total of 75,850 students
from class 6 to 10. We established Digital Learning Centres at government schools and community
centres, equipped with a modular curriculum covering Mathematics, Science, and English. The
centres facilitated teachers in delivering offline educational content through an android box and
TV screen. As a result, significant improvements in the academic performance of students in class
9 was recorded, with an increase of 25.2 percent in Mathematics and 24.4 percent in Science.
Similarly, class 10 students demonstrated progress, achieving a 30.4 percent improvement in
Mathematics and a 30.7 percent improvement in Science.
3) Project Paramarsh
Paramarsh provides career counselling and guidance to disadvantaged girls and boys between 15-
24 years of age to break the unconscious biases and stereotypes that impact their education and
career choices. The project reached out to over 29,000 programme participants in Delhi and Uttar
Pradesh states through career fairs, community interactions, and sessions in schools, coaching
centres and colleges. A comprehensive career guidance module of 20 hours has been developed
which has strengthened the capacities of 50 Changemakers and used in delivering career guidance
sessions in government schools and coaching centres operational within and nearby the project
locations.
18

--- Page 19 ---
:
~ Balika Shivi
:i n Ganga] ’s , e, Life _—~ 4
x i - s
My name is Ganga (name alk ed), and | hail from a quaint village in Rajasthan’s Bikaner
district, India. At the Balika Shivir centre, I’m pursuing my education while balancing life’s
challenges.
| was married when | was 1 ars old, giving birth to my first daughter at 15. | endured physical ,
and mental abuse before my mother rescued me from ashospital, where | had spent three days
unconscious. My nston three years ago after being pressured by his family due to the
continuous birth of daughters.
My uncle’s encouragement led me to rediscover my purpose for the sake of my daughters. That’s
when | learned about the Balika Shivir centre through Plan India’s outreach worker. My daughter
and | study there together, receiving education and emotional support. We engage in various
aCtivities like football, painting, dancing, and singing, and I’m even learning English.
Despite obstacles like missing documents, Plan India’s assistance helped me prepare for my
10th-grade open school exam. I’m actively involved in the Sakhi Sangam group, advocating for
girls’ education. Our community’s perception has shifted, with girls now determined to continue
their studies.

--- Page 20 ---
YOUTH AND HOUSEHOLD
ECONOMIC SECURITY
SA SHAM Ve
JOGORIENT 7 MONALSBAINING CE
—
We em power To ensure household economic security, we have
economically implemented projects for job-oriented vocational training and
disadvantaged youths entrepreneurship promotion. We worked closely with employers
"a GERUTA AeA and government to improve school-to-work transition, thereby
increasing women’s participation in the workforce. Our focus
employment and has been to support young women and men to build their skills
choose dignified in new economy jobs like IT enabled services, retail marketing
livelihoods through a and hospitality.
gender transformative In rural areas, we extend activities aimed at improving
approach. livelihoods and generating income and promoting women-
owned enterprises. We have assisted women in establishing
and expanding micro enterprises, accessing finance, markets,
and networks, and generating employment opportunities.
20

--- Page 21 ---
Key
Achievements
i
13,483 8,/64 9
Young women and men Trained youths were Low-cost sanitary
trained on Job-Oriented either job placed or napkin manufacturing
Vocational Training started their own micro- enterprises, operated by
and Vocational training enterprise with an community women, were
for Entrepreneurship average starting monthly established in Indore,
Promotion. income of INR 12,000. Ajmer, Gautam Buddha
Nagar, Telangana,
Keonjhar and Bengaluru.
173
Unemployed slum women
in Mumbai were trained
in tailoring & embroidery
& provided with sewing
machines, generating an
average monthly income
of INR 5,000 per women.

--- Page 22 ---
Flagship Projects
Project Saksham, which was started in 2010, seeks to provide market-oriented vocational skills,
particularly in new economy jobs, for unemployed young women and men from economically
vulnerable families. In 2022-23, 13,483 youths were trained, of which 8,764 have been job placed
with an average starting monthly income of INR 12,000. Given the market outlook, the monthly
income of these job placed youths is likely to increase as they continue to work. These youths are
from the states of Delhi, Karnataka, Maharashtra, and Rajasthan. Along with job-skills, these youths
have also been supported with life-skills such as awareness on gender equality, financial literacy,
personality development, personal hygiene, communication skills, computer skills and awareness of
government schemes.
Project Shakti
Project Shakti provides vocational skills training and self-employability for income generation for
young women from economically disadvantaged families. The project has trained 173 unemployed
slum women in Mumbai with tailoring and embroidery skills. It also provided them with sewing
machines. All these women are already earning a monthly salary of INR 5000 and is anticipated to
go further.
Shakti is also supporting rural women with entrepreneurial abilities to own and operate low-cost
sanitary napkin manufacturing units. Nine units have been set-up in Indore (MP), Ajmer (Rajasthan),
Gautam Buddha Nagar (UP), Hyderabad (Telangana), Keonjhar (Odisha) and Bengaluru
(Karnataka) districts. Beyond creating income opportunities for the 36 women entrepreneurs linked
with this project, the initiative has ensured menstrual equity for 1,35,000 rural women. These
rural women have access to low-cost sanitary napkins supplied at their doorsteps by the women
entrepreneurs.
22

--- Page 23 ---
e«#t= 2 °
From Burden to Breadwinner
Shefali (name changed) from Delhi, the sole provider,for her family of fi
circumstances with her father’s unemplauiaeinia@ag. i Financi
borrow from relatives merely to surviveTMHer parents
heavily on Shefali, making her feel like a burden due to
Aconversation with a friend led her to the Saksham centre, wh
Elderly Caretaker course. Despite initial challenges like.late ret
=
shefali’s journey is a testame!
and reshaping traditional mihpn

--- Page 24 ---
SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE
HEALTH RIGTHS AND SERVICES AND
MATERNAL AND CHILD HEALTH
A happy girl with her mother after health check-up.
We strengthen Several projects were implemented to focus on adolescent
community-based girls and young women, pregnant and lactating mothers,
services, with a specific Persons Living with HIVs (PLHIV), and TB patients. We have
focus on reaching out used community-based health models which are pivoted on
to populations in hard- peer educators and their roles as change agents.
to-access areas and Key interventions were undertaken by building the capacity
of the adolescents and youths on menstrual hygiene and
ensuring that healthcare
reproductive health, non-communicable diseases. Project
services reach even
interventions also helped improving WASH facilities at the
the most remote schools, establishing community-based resource centres -
communities. Health Information Centre (HIC), creating awareness and
facilitating linkages of the construction workers with health
facilities, facilitating pregnant women in getting access to
HIV testing, preventing and treating HIV/AIDS, strengthening
supply chain management system of HIV drugs across the
country.
24

--- Page 25 ---
Key
Achievements
G2 C“p-=~ s*S
221,732 15,962 2,000
Students were educated Persons, including Students from 137
through 8,125 peer children, were catered schools supported with
educators to ensure through Mobile Health capacity building to
safe menstrual hygiene Unit to improve access become members of
practices. to healthcare services school-based Water,
for migrant construction Sanitation and Hygiene
workers & their families. (WASH) clubs.
10,005 20,548
Teachers were sensitised Programme participants
on and hygiene were screened for HIV,
curriculum. TB, Syphilis, STIl/Hep B
and C through One-Stop
Centre intervention.
4,906 4,662 1,63,913
HIV-positive pregnant Private health facilities People in prisons or
women received Anti- were engaged with other closed settings
Retroviral Therapy during for HIV screening for have received an HIV
pregnancy. pregnant women. testing through Prison
Intervention.
25

--- Page 26 ---
Flagship Projects
1 Project Menstrual Health Education
The project is working to eliminate the social beliefs and myths surrounding puberty and end
the menstrual-related stigma and discrimination. It ensures safe, easy, dignified and sustainable
management of menstrual hygiene among girls and women in vulnerable and deprived families.
To advance menstrual equity, 221,732 girls and boys were trained through 8,125 peer educators
on menstrual hygiene management and its importance in rural areas of Bihar, Jnarkhand, Odisha
Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh and urban slums of Delhi and Telangana, fostering an environment
that supports safe, dignified, and sustainable menstrual health and hygiene management.
School sessions on menstrual health and hygiene for 8-12th standard students have emerged as
an effective strategy to discuss menstruation health and hygiene. In 38 Schools, 457 sessions were
organised with 2,176 children on menstrual health.
2) Project Banega Swasthya India (DBSI)
An initiative on School Hygiene Education, “Banega Swasthya India’, was implemented in 27
districts of Bihar, Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand states to build capacity of children on personal
hygiene, hygiene at home, hygiene at school, hygiene in neighbourhood and hygiene during illness
to reduce their absenteeism and focus on study in an adverse climate situation.
More than 4 lakh children from 2,700 schools were reached through Hygiene Curriculum and 6,250
school teachers were sensitised and a total of 2,000 child cabinets were formed in those schools
where more than 24,000 children are supporting schools to maintain hygiene.
Project The Birds and Bees Talk
With an aim of fostering ‘healthier lives, healthier people,’ this project is designed to empower
adolescents with critical life-saving information that nurtures healthy behaviours, enabling them to
become responsible, healthy adults.
This initiative was strategically launched across 34 districts spanning six north-eastern states,
namely Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, and Sikkim with a goal to
equip students with essential life skills, Knowledge, attitudes, and values. Through this initiative, we
engaged with 1,83,624 students and 3,755 teachers, covering 2,000 schools. We also established
partnerships with various government departments within these states to enhance the impact and
reach of our efforts.
26

--- Page 27 ---
The Young Health Programme (YHP) focuses on non-communicable disease (NCD) prevention
targeted towards young individuals aged 10 to 24 years residing in vulnerable and marginalised
settings within the unorganised colonies of Bengaluru, Chennai and Delhi. The project focuses on
five risky behaviours which significantly increase the likelinood of developing Non-communicable
Diseases later in life. This includes tobacco use, harmful use of alcohol, risky sexual behaviours,
physical inactivity and unhealthy diets.
More than 1,09,000 young people were trained by 1,474 peer educators for adoption of healthy
lifestyle, eating practices, knowledge about ill effects of substance abuse, and practices to avoid air
pollution. A total of 544 health workers including Anganwadi workers (family health), ASHA workers
(community health) and ANMs (Auxiliary Nurse Midwives) were trained on NCD prevention and
psychosocial support.
The project has ensured significant level of reduction (30%) in risky behaviours due to an increased
capacity to make informed choices about their health. About 92 percent (increase from 63%) of
the youths became aware of the existing health facilities in their locality. About 91 percent young
women started going for morning walk/evening walk (increase from 40%), 81 percent of the youths
started consuming fruits (increase from 18%). About 89 percent of the youths became aware of
hypertension (increase from 3%) and junk food consumption among youths has decreased by 26
percent.
The project is implemented with the objective of expanding HIV testing access by building capacities
of peripheral health workers and converging HIV testing with primary health services at all VHNDs,
urban health facilities and in private health facilities.
It also focuses on ensuring sustainable Prevention of Parent to Child Transmission (PPTCT)
services and developing a robust data management system through continuous monitoring and
mentoring of the facilities for quality record keeping and bring them ‘level ready’ for the Elimination
of Mother to Child Transmission (EMTCT) data validation exercise. Under the project, a strong
outreach system at the district level has been established to support HIV-positive pregnant women
(PPV), their partners/spouses, and HIV Exposed Infants (HEI) in accessing PPTCT services
provided by the National AIDS Control Organisation (NACO).
In the reporting period, 4,906 HIV-positive pregnant women received Antiretroviral Therapy (ART)
during pregnancy. Engaging the private sector has been a key strategy under the project. Around
20,500 private health facilities were mapped, of which 7,446 facilities were found to be providing
ANC services and 4,662 have been engaged and are reporting the number of pregnant women
screened for HIV to the government. Additionally, through 68 ‘One Stop Centres’ (OCS) that provide
various services to new/uncovered Key Populations, 29,367 programme participants were enrolled,
with 20,548 screened for HIV, TB, Syphilis, STI, Hepatitis B and C.
Through Prison and OCS intervention, 163,913 people in prisons or other closed settings have
received an HIV test during the reporting period.
27

--- Page 28 ---
No text found on this page.


--- Page 29 ---
Savita (name changed), a you girl from a rural community of Hazaribagh district, JA lar
enstruation and he ere many myths and misconceptions
had limited knowledge about
about it in her community. made her feel bad about herself during her menstrual cycle.
She wanted someone to provide her guidance and understanding, which she received at a
two-day training programme organised by Plan India. Savita learned about the importance
cleanliness, hygiene, and dispelled misconceptions, which boosted her self-confidence. Th
training also equipped her with practical knowledge such as proper disposal of sanitary napk
and maintaining a healthy diet during menstruation.
Knowing about her own body and menstrual cycle made her feel more confident about herself
and she decided to spread this knowledge to others.
Savita started organising awareness sessions in her village, schools, and public places. At first,
some people made fun of her and didn’t take her seriously. However, with time and commitment,
her family and community started supporting and respecting her efforts.
Thanks to her determination, Savita showed everyone that with the right information and
understanding, menstruation is nothing to be ashamed of. Savita’s journey of education and
empowerment still continues, making a positive change in her community.
VAS)

--- Page 30 ---
Capacities of the girls and young women were built on
gender and safety issues in public places, and digital
platforms, ill effects of child marriage, legal rights and
entitlements, thus enhancing the agency of girls and
young women. We also placed significant emphasis on
involving boys and men to promote positive social norms.
We facilitated young Champions of Change from the
communities to conduct safety walks using the Young Citizen
Score Card which enabled the government authorities to
take evidence-based decision for girls’ safety. Our projects
also addressed the issues of cross-border trafficking by
strengthening government systems and child protection
mechanisms at community levels.
30

--- Page 31 ---
Key
Achievements
28,439 981
Individuals were made Families were linked
aware on legal provisions to social protection
against the harmful schemes.
practices.
ian
753 900 200
Youth were capacitated as Girls were trained in Officials, teachers
change-agents on self- digital storytelling using and transporters were
defence, life skills, and mobile phones for raising sensitised on gender and
digital safety walk. issues related to girls and safety.
young women.
000
17
Parks were renovated
and made safer for girls in
urban areas.

--- Page 32 ---
Flagship Projects
The project trained 753 youths in Delhi (442 girls and 311 boys) and encouraged their active
involvement as agents of change to ensure safety of girls and young women in public spaces. The
training encompassed self-defence techniques, life skills, and digital safety awareness. In addition,
we conducted workshops and specific campaigns to sensitise 200 police officials, public transport
personnel, and teachers regarding gender-related safety issues in public spaces.
The young Champions of Change conducted safety audits using the Young Citizen Score Card.
As a result of this, the local urban authorities renovated 17 parks in the communities. These
improvements included the installation of public toilets and street lighting, and improvement of
access roads, making these areas safer for girls and young women.
The project was implemented in the rural area of Gautam Buddha Nagar district of Uttar Pradesh
in coordination with the Department of Rural Development, through their Nari Shakti Kendras (Self-
Help Groups).
The pilot phase facilitated community development initiatives with girls, boys and adult community
members in a collaborative participatory approach to create localised practices for making the
village friendly and safe for girls through capacity building of 1,500 children, young people on
gender issues, menstrual hygiene, legal literacy by volunteers and changemakers, and conducting
safety walks. Additionally, we worked on aligning existing government schemes for girls, such as
Beti Bachao Beti Padhao, through convergence with various departments.
To prevent child marriages among vulnerable girls, identified using the child marriage vulnerability
index (Shakti Meter), an evidence-based digital tool was developed by Plan India. Using this digital
tool, we mapped 2,567 vulnerable families in Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh. We enrolled 578
vulnerable girls under 18 years in open or regular schools, while 331 young women aged 19-24
years were enrolled in skilling programs. Additionally, 981 vulnerable families were connected with
social protection schemes.
Our awareness campaign on the Prevention of Child Marriage Act, 2006 reached 26,579 boys and
girls in Secondary and Senior Secondary schools (aged 14-18 years) and we educated them about
the provisions of the Act and the available schemes supporting girls’ continued education.
32

--- Page 33 ---
To combat cross-border trafficking from Nepal and Bangladesh, as well as internal trafficking within
the country, we initiated a comprehensive project in 666 border-adjacent villages. We established
robust protection mechanisms and safety nets through the training of child protection service
providers and duty bearers, including Anti-Human Trafficking Units and Border Guarding Forces.
In the intervention areas, over 550 change-agents were identified and empowered, who raised
awareness against child labour, child marriage, and child-trafficking. With the support from block
administration, CHILDLINE, police, border guarding forces, and the ProTect project field team,
these change-agents have successfully prevented 158 child marriages, rescued 48 child labourers,
intercepted 39 cases of human trafficking, and facilitated the re-enrollment of 60 vulnerable girls in 6
project intervention districts. The Child Marriage Prevention and Tracking Register, developed with
Plan India’s support, was adopted by the Block administration of Bhagwangola-ll and Beldanga-ll
blocks of Murshidabad district in West Bengal. Measures such as migration cards and registers
were implemented to ensure safe migration.
To empower girls and communities towards the prevention of gender-based violence and the
promotion of gender equality, a legal literacy awareness project called ‘Garima’ was implemented,
reaching over 28,439 children through Legal Literacy Mitras (Girl Changemakers) in a peer-to-peer
model in Delhi and Uttar Pradesh.
EBRATING ONE YEAR Of
33

--- Page 34 ---
No text found on this page.


--- Page 35 ---
Inspiring Resilience’ : 20°54
Rehanal(iame changed), a 22-year-old survivor of child marriage and now a divorcee
forced into marriage at the age of 16. Her husband abandoned her, and she moved be
her parents. Rehana said, “My in-laws would not let me study and treated me like a.se
she Tell into depression as she had no job or source of income, eventually becoming a
gender-based violence.,Later, when she met Plan India’s Protect project team, she.dec
pursue Her dream of continuing her studies.
The team’ helped her enroll in the Utkarsh Bangla Scheme of the’'Government of India
nursing.training course. She was selected for residential training in Bardhhaman district
Bengal} where she completed her training in February 2023, emerging as the top stude 7. her
batch.
be Soon after, she secured a job in a nursing home in Bangalore. Today, Rehana is living a
Yio significantly improved life with a full-time job and accommodation, earning approximately INR
13,000 per month. Her story is a testament to the relentless spirit of girl power. Rehana now
aspires to combat gender-based violence in her own unique way, determined to be a beacon of
hope for others facing similar challenges.
35

--- Page 36 ---
NUTRITION AND EARLY
CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT
We ensure that infants, This involves strengthening the systems, changing behaviours
children, adolescents, and practices of a range of stakeholders to improve the quality
and mothers from of food and feeding practices, thereby preventing malnutrition.
disadvantaged families We created awareness among pregnant women, lactating
have access to age mothers, adolescents and youths on consuming nutritious
appropriate nutrition foods during pregnancy and afterwards, infant and young child
services and knowledge feeding practices, complementary feeding, and causes and
in nurturing childcare preventive measures of anaemia.
practices for early
° The efforts resulted in 84 percent pregnant women and 91
childhood development.
percent lactating mothers being aware of age-appropriate
complementary feeding, as shown in the post-intervention
assessment. Community-level self-help groups were mobilised
to ensure pregnant women receive sufficient cooked nutritious
food, alongside enhancing the government's capacity to
monitor nutritional status through a digital application,
addressing the same with 1,000-day approach.
36

--- Page 37 ---
Key
Achievements
7,350 375
Pregnant women and Pregnant women
lactating mothers, supported with 33,668
including 3,875 high risk nutritious meal packets
pregnancies, were linked & made aware of healthy
to government Anganwadi hygiene & sanitation
Centres to receive practices which resulted
antenatal care and in ensuring no weight loss
postnatal care services. among pregnant women
& 140 babies born with
adequate birth weight.
Oa
No
62
Anganwadi Centres
were strengthened by
providing materials such as
Stadiometer, Infanto-meter,
digital baby weighing scale
and weighing scale for
adults and children.
37

--- Page 38 ---
Through the project, we enhanced maternal nutrition by delivering hot, nutritious meals to
malnourished pregnant women at their homes in Bikaner district of Rajasthan. This approach met
their additional calorie requirements, leading to improved outcomes for both mothers and newborns.
We provided support to 375 pregnant women, delivering a total of 33,668 nutritious meal packets
while also educating them about healthy hygiene and sanitation practices.
As a result, none of the pregnant women in the programme experienced weight loss during their
pregnancy. All 140 babies born had adequate birth weights, ranging from 2.5 kg to 3.5 kg, with no
cases of low birth weight. Furthermore, 69 percent of pregnant women with a normal Body Mass
Index (between 18.5 and 23.0) gained weight according to established standards after being
exposed to the intervention for 60 days or more. The initiative also fostered entrepreneurship
among women’s groups. Nineteen women, recognized as “Poshahar Mitra’, were promoted as
entrepreneurs within their communities.
The project improved the nutritional status of children under 2 years of age in 57 urban slums across
two districts in Telangana state. It has reached out to 5,120 pregnant women, lactating mothers, and
children aged up to 2 years through home visits and awareness campaigns. Over 3,200 pregnant
women and lactating mothers have received Ante-natal Care and Post-natal Care services by being
linked with Anganwadi Centres and receiving regular follow-ups. The initiative also bolstered 62
Anganwadi Centres with materials like Stadiometer, Infanto-meter, digital baby weighing scale, and
adult and child weighing scale, facilitating accurate growth monitoring. Knowledge about the causes
of child malnutrition has increased significantly, with 65 percent of pregnant women (compared to
20% at baseline) and 69 percent of lactating mothers (compared to 20% at baseline) having been
made aware.
The project is implemented in two tribal districts of Maharashtra, two tribal districts of Gujarat, and
one district in Rajasthan with a target towards reduction by 40 percent in the number of children
under 5 who are stunted, and to decrease and maintain childhood wasting at less than 5 percent.
It focuses on the critical first 1,000 days of life and employs innovative digital modules to enhance
the health, hygiene, and nutrition of pregnant women and children. The project created awareness
on nutritious diet in 18,455 households. The project provided support to more than 4,150 pregnant
women, including 3,875 with high-risk pregnancies, as well as 2,764 malnourished children in the
reporting period. Additionally, 500 children have been connected to Nutrition Rehabilitation Centres.
The project uses a digital application to collect and track the health and nutritional status of the
pregnant women, lactating mother and newborn babies and a token amount is transferred to the
beneficiary bank account (parent of the SAM child) through $2B (Straight to Bank) after verification.
An assessment conducted this year showed that 88 percent of the SAM children were referred to
the NRCs and 77 percent of the SAM children have improved their nutritional status to MAM (33%
of the SAM moved to normal) and 55 percent of the MAM children have moved to normal.
38

--- Page 39 ---
ari gh Nutrition: |
ga’s Jou a Healthy — rE
nancy ¢ Seyond \
eet
ame changed), from Diyat age. in Bikaner District of Rajasthan became pregnant
econd time and suffered fre alnutrition, After registering at the sub-centre, she was
to, Plan India’s frontline sta ymmunity Nutrition Worker (CNVV) by an Auxiliary Nurse
(ANM). The CNW visited hei sidence and enrolled her as a beneficiary of the project.
gathered information abo rga's health and dietary habits. Reviewing her medical
CNW noted that Durga hadi ered a low birth weight baby with only 2 kg. in her first
cy when she was anaemic é € received a blood transfusion.
as then connected with a “Poshahar Mitra” named Pushpa Devi, responsible for
g nutritious meals. From January 2028, Pushpa started delivering hot, freshly cooked
o Durga’s doorstep, adhering to a meal plan created by a nutrition expert. She was
d about the significance of a nourishing diet during pregnancy and the essential care
sd during this critical period. In her first and second trimesters, Durga received one meal
ithe day, while in her third trimester, due to the project intervention, she received two
Is daily.
The continued assistance led to enhancements in her health metrics, including weight and
haemoglobin levels. At the time of enrollment, Durga weighed 45 kg with a haemoglobin level
of 7.6 gm/dl. By the end of her third trimester, Durga’s haemoglobin rose to 12.6 gm/dl, and
her weight had reached 63 kg. In June 2023, Durga gave birth in the hospital to a healthy baby
weighing 3.8 kg. Durga and her family expressed gratitude to the CNW and “Poshahar Mitra” for
their support and credited Plan India’s ‘MoM’s Plate’ project.
She has transformed into a community change-agent, sharing her positive experience and
encouraging other mothers to embrace nutritious food, inspired by the benefits she received from
the project.
39

--- Page 40 ---
Humanitarian relief for disaster-affected families.
We ensure all children, Under the humanitarian relief response, Plan India ensured
especially girls and that children, with a particular emphasis on girls and young
young women have women, received swift and adequate access to high-quality
humanitarian aid- food and non-food item kits, hygiene
prompt and adequate
kits. Our efforts also enhanced awareness on COVID-19
access to quality
vaccination and facilitated people to get vaccinated.
humanitarian assistance
during the time of
emergency.
40

--- Page 41 ---
Key
Achievements
Ne
22,195 9,122
Persons affected in Children received
Assam Flood were nutritious food for 30
provided with dry ration days.
kits aid for 30 days.
(an
97,603 48,61,039 13,62,774
People were provided People were made Hesitant rural and tribal
with Water and Hygiene aware about COVID-19 individuals sensitised with
kits which helped in vaccination in Jharkhand COVID-19 vaccination.
preventing waterborne and Odisha.
diseases.

--- Page 42 ---
In response to the flood-affected families in Nagaon district, Assam, we delivered humanitarian aid,
which included food and hygiene kits, household and shelter kits, water kits, and kitchen kits. The
distribution of dry ration kits ensured that 22,195 individuals (comprising family members of those
who received the dry ration kits after being affected by the flood) had access to food for a 30-day
period. Moreover, 9,122 children received nutritious food, equivalent to a minimum of three meals
for a 30-day duration. The hygiene kits benefitted 28,208 young girls and women, promoting safe
menstrual hygiene practices and preventing urinary tract infections. Furthermore, the water and
hygiene kits supported 57,603 individuals in adopting healthy hygiene practices, thus reducing the
risk of waterborne diseases.
2) Project MOMENTUM Routine Immunization
Through the MOMENTUM Routine Immunization Transformation and Equity project, Plan India
expedited COVID-19 vaccine coverage in four tribal districts of Jnarkhand and ten districts of
Odisha. Overcoming vaccine hesitancy, boosting vaccine demand, and strengthening last-mile
connectivity were vital aspects that required a multifaceted approach. This approach encompassed
building trust, addressing concerns, and ensuring fair access to vaccines.
The initiative deployed 80 frontline vaccine ambassadors who reached out to 48,61,039 individuals
with clear, straightforward, and easily comprehensible communication to simplify information.
To guarantee accessibility to remote areas and equitable vaccine distribution, 450 hard-to-reach
locations were identified and eligible persons were vaccinated. We collaborated with community
organisations to ensure equitable vaccine distribution and to address access disparities among
marginalised communities facing barriers. By supporting innovative and advanced methods of
delivering messages, more than 13,62,774 people in hesitant rural and tribal communities were
vaccinated.
3) Project Cold Wave Response
We provided support to the severe cold wave situation in Delhi, through distribution of blankets to
3,650 homeless persons, women, old age persons, persons with disability and members of the
transgender community.
42

--- Page 43 ---
e
u
y - —
ide
c= i |e a, :
ar
=
|
g
m
?
e
g
a
T
4

--- Page 44 ---
Plan India hosted the 6th Edition of the Plan India Impact Awards 2023 to honour the last-mile
champions including frontline workers, youth leaders and changemakers, for their outstanding efforts in
ensuring the development and delivery of basic services for children, adolescents, and others across
the country. The awards honoured the selfless contributions of outstanding individuals through eight
award categories — (a) Best Anganwadi Worker; (b) Best Accredited Social Health Activist/Auxiliary
Nurse/Midwife; (c) Best Child Welfare Committee; (d) Best Youth Changemaker (Male); (e) Best Youth
Changemaker (Female); (f) Best Community Volunteer; (g) Best Women’s Self Help Group; (h) Best
Last-Mile Champion for Girls’ Rights.
The Awards hosted a special category Best Digital Champion for Girls’ Rights to recognise and felicitate
girls and young women who leverage the power of social media to advance girls’ rights and women’s
empowerment.
The Awards received an overwhelming response from across the country, with 250 nominations
competing for the prestigious Awards.
y on . r >
(AD! 5th ) BEST YOUN
ww ' (- meee i V SAL‘ v’ A R (| C=c LraE
= -
Pa ’ age “a ~~
- BnEcSe!T AaUrU RSEoLOCCUNVAIIITO CND CSAOLCLI,A L \ ) . 4 : ~‘
Dnd HEALTH ACTIVIST/AUXILIARY 6 BEST WOMEN’S
MECALIP AU TIVIS T/AUVAILIARN METER alegre el alee
CATEGORY a ae cae i ants daliates ar, 4 CATEGORY SELF-HELP GROUP ‘
tT JS e) wl y t =F 6 oe
ee y <=: \
3°¢ Ba CHI \ FARE 7th
CATEGORY CU Py CATEGORY
J
Pim BEST YOUNG gtr
TROOP C7)H A i | } A> U M(Rh A! ; CaTrcoms
K )-
44

--- Page 45 ---
Girls’ Rignts
OE lr
we)Saal
Glimpses of Plan India Impact Award Ceremony.
45

--- Page 46 ---
106 12 40 6
CHILDRENS STATES FACILITATORS EXPERTS /
MENTORS
Plan India is committed to empowering children and building their capacities as active agents of
change in their own communities. Our children-led programming fosters collaboration and provides
children with opportunities to address the underlying challenges at all levels.
To this end, we curated a unique platform that enables children to showcase their talents while also
facilitating the sharing of knowledge, awareness, and solutions.
Through this platform, children are empowered to work together towards bringing positive change in
their communities and creating sustainable solutions to the challenges faced by them.
The 1st Edition of the Children’s Creativity Festival 2023 was organised from 14 to 16 June 2023, in
Dehradun, Uttarakhand at the Vigyan Dham (UCOST). Over 100 children between age group of 13
to 17 years from 12 states across India participated in the celebration of creativity.
These children, during the three days of the workshop, curated 1000 products and performances
including 3-D models, comics, posters, wall paintings, drama, role play, performance (yoga and
taekwondo), traditional art and dance.
46

--- Page 47 ---
VIHILVALIN OU VINE
ee
(
>
x
y\ ©
ms : _- :
J ; ia ij -
it
ra :
.
a . /
t
\. nn ae ;
4).
Glimpses of Children’s Creativity Festival.
47

--- Page 48 ---
- - “ lies a ’ wee
150 ‘ one : . S!
“& “a 4 ‘. .
I NATIONAL &
PERL OEN ee an ~< P— STATES DIPLOMATIC CORPORATES F 5% 2s
enbY et g coldae Ie sm sr
e e
a aS
e
ePE
ee
IBe SEOVERS eho rt ea: .
.
| MISSIONS
\a
|=
~ ~
Si aoe RSS SEN =
International Day of the Girl (IDG) is Plan India’s national campaign for girls’ and young women’s
voice, power, and leadership under which young girl changemakers from Plan India communities
across India take over positions of power and leadership.
During IDG 2022, girl changemakers hailing from 10 Indian states — Bihar, Delhi, Jnarkhand,
Odisha, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand — took over the
positions of Ambassadors, High Commissioners, Deputy Chiefs of Mission, CEOs, Heads of
Government Institutions and local bodies to raise the issue of equal access to education, health,
financial inclusion, digital literacy.
They demanded greater representation of girls and young women in the decision -making process
and engaged in discussions on girls’ rights and gender equality, bringing their keen insight and
perspectives to the table.
At the national level, takeover of 12 Diplomatic Missions was organised including that of the
European Union, Australian High Commission, Embassy of the Kingdom of Belgium, Embassy of
the Czech Republic, Embassy of Finland, Embassy of Israel, Embassy of Lithuania, Embassy of
Mexico, Embassy of Denmark, Norwegian Embassy, Embassy of the Republic of Slovenia, German
Embassy. In addition, the changemakers took over leadership roles at five corporates- HandM
(Hennes and Mauritz Retail Private Limited), AstraZeneca, Deutsche Bank, Z Zurich Foundation and
AXA XL.
48

--- Page 49 ---
49

--- Page 50 ---
FROM OUR DONORS
Plan India has forged a strong and enduring partnership with Sandvik
in these recent years. Their unwavering commitment to community
welfare is exemplified by their collaboration with Sandvik, which
commenced as a small community initiative three years ago and has
since grown into a deep-rooted association encompassing multiple
long-term projects.
The Plan India team has consistently demonstrated their dedication
and wholehearted engagement in the successful execution of
our flagship girls’ education project in Telangana. Their efforts not
only helped us achieve our set milestones but surpassed them,
greatly benefiting underprivileged children, particularly girls. Their remarkable contributions have
spurred further collaborations, including the ‘Model School Project’ in Pune and a comprehensive
transformation of all pre-primary schools in the Sangareddy district of Telangana state. | extend my
heartfelt congratulations to the entire Plan India team and wish them continued success in all their
future endeavours.
Mr Ravi Arora, Head of Marketing and CSR, Sandvik Mining and Rock Technology India Pvt. Ltd.
Plan India team works transparently, and | know exactly where and
how my fund is being utilised. The clear impact of the project is visible,
this can be achieved only by engaging with a knowledgeable partner
like Plan India. | could not achieve these results with my funds by
myself. | get a sense of ownership of the project, with the Plan team as
a partner and my views are also incorporated into the project,
Mr Rajeev Shroff, Leadership Coach at Global Organisations
C6
AXA XL is proud to be associated with Plan India to provide job
oriented vocational training to the youth from the local community and
help young people fulfill their potential.
Our partnership with Plan India is now in its 4th year running and it
has been nothing short of extraordinary. | am especially delighted
at the level of focused dedication and professionalism displayed by
Plan India. Together, we have achieved goals despite unprecedented
hurdles and this showcases a great working relationship. Through our
partnership we have been able to secure jobs for over 1500 youth, as
part of the Saksham program. Our volunteers at AXA XL have greatly
valued the opportunity to contribute through this program and have in turn learnt a great deal from
the youth.
Mr Basheer, Sustainability and CSR Manager, AXA XL
50

--- Page 51 ---
Reckitt proudly celebrates our enduring partnership with Plan
India, marked by impactful projects aligned with India’s Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs 2, 3, 4, 5, 10, 13 and 17). Together, our
programs focus on health, education, nutrition, gender equality, and
empowerment of the girl child.
It is a shared vision for a cleaner, healthier world that unites Reckitt
and Plan India. We express our heartfelt gratitude for their unwavering
dedication and innovative approaches, jointly addressing health,
hygiene, and well-being challenges across communities in India
ensuring that no one is left behind.
Ravi Bhatnagar, Director, External Affairs & Partnerships, SOA, Reckitt
Partners and Friends
Illustrative list of valued donors
Adecco zee —_._ @
A Gobel community investment initiative
sSupoporntedi by T08& [7] CBRE Z —-G) stowan
engagement programme ERICSSON
paren “> 2 IVC Metso:Outotec TM® Microsoft
PENEL
°
@#) i
«
Z)
a © fata . ZURICH
© age CHILDREN'S PRocRAM Foundation
®

--- Page 52 ---
PLAN INDIA IN NEWS
(a Shs ea wa ae
tres Bien chars ern sachet aces
346 impactful stories on Plan India programmes, campaigns, innovative | we free 9 von rere @ a0 event)
projects, girl changemakers and COVID-19 humanitarian response
were published.
re et fe wet
ter Ges & Pe)
A ee ey teres owen et! hs ntee o Same —_——
Girls meet SSB officers
eee
ROR eer be
rr oe fh 8 Oe ree et er fer et oy
wm eee 8 ee re eee ee me ee
- x rd we eee, Gh0e ele & Orcteere rir Or On wr: tot ete & eres
See et enter vty eret Bat feet e
wanda nGra mere feb png tonal ans
catty, Soewa wee mn Ee"
bare werent wadte rem eres :
pln n= >
> = Oe.
= ~ rq Cow owed cer here eet wh!
————a— ea s foto wi tr on Oe me oe t atud & e sows SON TO et ae tee stent & at toe ot:
« oe o~
w :
wP ier er e triw me elee, eee’ aniees rei,
edOwr are ,e wwee rfee w Oweens |
= wae On te Ow or he ot © Ot),
Gh 6 ee wid mrt Hrcraeeana ste RereATea t Vaeet ©s
ore owen © fers
worn 0) ew eee eer
ot es © Oe et erent
1 ore enw oe ore ©
wen rl ert ewe treet
ere weirs ere weer
ye et Oi pews O eee
4) 44 60! ane oe te
(ee a) ewe CTO 1s ve gte a)
aus 1 enh Gore “oun whee: Qed tb
omer cece?
eects
ee 4 een 4
ee ee
o4 ont em a)
tr rd 4 onele cere
wr Ole enn ed rete «
<1 6 oe ee a ©
F qo wer On @) wrer
veer 0
eres
Gu2rnee oic ctee wwio ea tte a5re4binnve
ort Cote
“nm © &wh ane
“
sere" 4
yt frend, carey
roe «) eree i werd
ewe ene?
eh gen ere eee)
«ewes
+€« sdeueae
pe Get
ers ee! 6 ee
(ted wi fhat aecfour «
ee Ree ek
6 on & aay & @ ae C Bs Gee
2014 ep wom 4s 8 ee
ti owe «One dae
a at? ote <<) ee ert ht ee et eg
ets Ee ae)
+ 6d Gr Seer 4 ee) ae
woe? eter ed Comer 4 tom
et Cowen 6 of 4 eee)
Churning out change
from chain of challenges
A group
Migration ¢:
SAR
of 1 girls BERHAMPORE: “My husbarnd
sriving % make « was electrocuted in the city
dilkrence TM
Sedtharthnage aad on May 12 this year. We all
Maharagan, share migrated there in search of
their caperionsry am!
achievernents dhuting work. He used to work as the
reerac thee mut helper
ards for sale migration
GE vt a oO “|
—————E———
Lock —
ae awe
of an electrician. After
| See
his death the administration
TNE AR UTNE, CE
and hospital authority were
reluctamt to handover the
deceased. Fortunately, the
Ramnagar Bachra Gram
Panchayat issued us a migra
tion card and enrolled us as
the migrants in their regis
ter, which helped us a lot to
get the dead body back,” said
Mamata Roy, wife of the de
ceased
In tune with the advisory
of Ministry of Home Affairs
dated July 6, 220 which states
that because chikdren can be
transported ona large scale for
wage labour, prostitution and
trafficking, panchayat may be
asked to maintain a register
of complete information about
the persons living in the vil
lage and keep track of their
movement. Plan India jointly
with the Beldanga 2 block of
«3, coe. tree
| ste (2m | men Rey fle we), wh fee ere ware Moe Te
oe] ie
“eters ebay coer we ave EAE) CTS CT |
panes .
“feorn rn fie went wren rach |
“fe eck bein ween
Ss —
Murshidahad has started the Dey, Joint BDO of Beldanga 2
initiative of migration register block has requested all the rest
and migration cards §Gram Panchayat Pradhan to
The initiative was started in start migration cards in their
December 202! in Rammagar respective panchayats,
Bachra Gram Panchayat In a recent visit of West
and April 2023 in Shaktipur Bengal Commission for
Gram Panchayat. Till date Protection of Child Rights
685 migrants registered their and the Murshidabad dis
names in the migration regis trict administration the
ter. Among them 1 child who Chairperson, Ms. Sudeshna
was migrated with the family Roy, has appreciated the ini
and 3 females were enrolled. tiative and she said that the
Considering it as one of the practice ts helpful in checking
best practices to check illegal trafficking human beings in
migration Mr. Uday Narayan the area
52

--- Page 53 ---
UPDATE ON THE PREVENTION OF
SEXUAL HARASSMENT OF WOMEN AT
THE WORKPLACE
At Plan India, we are committed to fostering a safe, inclusive, and respectful work environment for
everyone associated with the organisation. We believe that every individual deserves to be treated
with dignity and respect, free from any form of harassment or discrimination. Upholding these
values is not just a legal requirement but also an ethical and moral responsibility that we share as a
collective. We value Diversity and have over 48% Women Employees at Management Level
To reinforce our commitment and ensure compliance with POSH guidelines, we ensure awareness
and understanding of policy by every individual in the organisation. We have established a robust
system for reporting any incidents of sexual harassment.
Number of complaints received in the year
FY 2022 — 23 One
Number of complaints disposed of in the year One
2022-23
Number of cases pending for more than 90 days | None
Number of awareness programs or workshops
Three POSH policy awareness for new joiners
conducted to create sensitization on this law in
and refresher for existing staff
the year 2022-23
Inconclusive report submitted to Women
Nature of action taken by the employer in the
Commission, Bhubaneswar, Odisha in August
complaints in the year 2022-23
2022, hence no action was taken
“>
53

--- Page 54 ---
a
recene onnet
5 @
“Pan
ew
ze
;
' 2am; = =,
5
iat
eae ase
gi
"
a) '
| ae
Ami

--- Page 55 ---
The Network for Transgender Persons recognised Plan India as the Helping Hand Organisation working for
the welfare of the transgender community.
L* TM c fa
MAHATMA 7 Feral
AWARD | URRPR
The Birds and Bees Talk Programme being Plan India awarded with Mahatma Award for Gender
appreciated by Th. Biswajit Singh, Minister Equality 2022 for their work in facilitating girls’ and young
for Power, Forest, Environment and Climate women’s increased participation in public, economic
Change, Agriculture, Science and Technology, and social spheres by enabling provision of safe and
Government of Manipur for conducting ‘One Day accessible public spaces and building their agency under
Health Camp’ on the theme - “Health for All” in the project Pink Toilets (Garima Greh).
collaboration with Classic Homeo.
55

--- Page 56 ---
yl uh den Oe (rev Ot),
tar ged cre aia” aerate 3 commas trergarey & Sem.
ea ae meee Meat oer were cep Gat conor, fee oft
peish qa Dee tom ob soft centtranrie ca} enfbas pmencnon
sr aera
JO} + Wh OID UAE 448 Fak Ah ta
<THE + Tek Ott THI EIKe
(ert thsroted
“free og ahora wart otade ag teers ee
fity croftat fee & onnee oy, oer wear cd ware & Sears By URE ara
dea dy agen are oh er aT
sqrorray Ss wae after re eT ee eT
gered av aap 2 ard odie 8) arene aa, ee aay Bie aN
qunfiearco, eet feta rh fafge fieeat oe aroty oral ale cereal an ta et
cmon eet 2 fre aliapeye | ar ale area at a eT es eT ae aera
danas aera theme 31
ane tear ake sacar wfer oars ed uget & fer erect
carpet fing carat fsa st gpm)
aL, )
rar"
farina ora)
0 fee een rel of Se Oo, Ge co eooog
iH
een | on -aaeco tee, S“ ESaeed r ene etein on ieeiewec ned cum tataoninst Manabe, 8 a
56
ir a : i
3%
Ua —WPLHC-4-2 /ma3 /24.9D
Te
Ww Sudhw Kumar Ra
Techracal Leed
PROTECT Project, Plan india
Cee Mr Sudhw
On penal of Viger and Chéc Security Organaavon (WWCSO), Uttar Pracesn Pubco |
woukd the lo take Sie opportunty to convey cer thanks to Plan inca Icr ts ochve
parbapation and support to the launch program of cor Sraan Dat Campaign. Your uffort
© Oevelte and suppor! Us wah Posies cn Sate & Uneste Touch and Cyter Safety eeyen
hat E6Oed VitUE I Cus high-ecale awarnnnss Neate
hee | een happy to shore that the Gesign aod content of Meee poston worn tgtty
aoprecieted by the partiopeting women potce officers. Once agar thanks for extendog
we support to prowde us with good number of posters, which Peiped it sharrg the ane
wah all women pobce officers representing 64 districts of the state
Aa you know under ths campaign Grakt Dict wil weit the achcols of af TS caticm a!
he simte to make the gitte studying iy class 6-6 aware stout safe ard uneale touch andi
cyoet securty, They wil ceganize vercus hands-on ecivies and wi also shee Mer
itde eter O06 venous helpline quent fun by Tre etale Gowerment ih eulh #
Situation, te Pree poetors mace on Sus top< under he jot sega of WCSO and Plan
ia Guring the awareness program are yery s*@ortant
wh es regarc, ¢ Pian indie can poovede we S50) comes of each of ese pouter 10500
comes of all three posters mm total then we wil be able to eters thal Dose Costers wil
help Shaki Dida in ther school veds tvoughoet the state dung the Shatti Op
aampegn
Ve value ou partineane anc nope Wal Mee before. the Women anc Crd Secunty
Onpanwatan, UP polos wil contmwe tp get suppert fro) Plant india and ou colectyn
forts lo mene crikiien. oapecialy pre. aware an! em oowered 9 the state will canteen
to De shangthened
Ses! Viahes’
A\L>
Ruck wy, iPS
rtecdent of Pakce Veomen und Ctrkt Secveity Ongeentation Uttar Pradesh Pulce. Lucenow

--- Page 57 ---
W Ao JAl Yd BH HE A TT r iT e se sr a wat vd H a Me Ud hw lo Aa)
Minister of State for Defence and Tourism
Government of India
(S2 GE&?®, Tic
Ft)
“WE Bary Pst
Weal
——
Wat Ue ferad ey aici ef Bt eat & fH Yee ar sree wa
fedict vd car sfeat & el-ge aca 4 Sete erguis iteifdars ay
avian at wea tar oe selfra cht ag off Gua oRONA sa SRS
& Stal aay 8 BAe var asa wr A wey eens wre feat &,
fadla tar wR Gy ud aed & sera fret ht Hart wifes seer GT
SU CLT WA SSH & eM Gdla eat GAR Veet a Taye foret G Hart
at GaN GT TA ESM Vl ctal at aul A a fab sit faenca a fat
ary org 4 fach amy weer sfea Ge ear ar AA vert fears, 4 s4
fruiciall at usher aed El gael seg al |e BA et Gel gad AraI-
feat, rari =) dan oe ak FH sre oral @ fe ga WER at
gfdalfiae Setet & arr afasy 4 At etc vert
sq ufdaitar 3 wert era ora Get Ge 50000 Al aaeifet 4
sesifia fear var @, fecta tera ord Seq Ge F35000 4 Bahaa fear
Ta @ sik qdla eet We SR GX 15000 Hi saaial S ania fan
Ta #1 sa aed orl & fey, 4 Yee & diay aga wise sf cia
GH oft al Vd SRRGEX VRCIe Ws meat sft ef Weare off ay
dgd-agd Fas Sal & SiR aN HRT | fH Gas Fa WHR S yas Haw
RNR a
we |
feqia: 2O 3gaX, 2023
Teor: = - AS feet!
Office . 114-A, South Block, New Delni-110017, Ks : O11. cabot 011-23794621, Fax :011-23016255, E-mail: mos-deflenceagoyv.i
Res(Delhi)M:i ni1s0t,r yT eoefn MTouur: i iesTransport Bhawan, Parliament Street, Néw Delhi rg, New Dethi 110001, Tel. - O91-23010181, 011-239010182
57

--- Page 58 ---
FINANCIAL DISCLOSURES
The following financial statements are prepared in accordance with the Indian Accounting Standards
as applicable to a Small and Medium Sized Enterprise and represent an abridged version of our
full financial statements which are available on our website at Financial Disclosure (planindia.org).
The consolidated statement of financial position should be read in conjunction with the accompanying
notes of accounts and schedules.
Balance Sheet as at March 31, 2023
(All amounts in Rupees)
As at March 31, 2023 As at March 31, 2022
FCRA NFCRA Total FCRA NFCRA Total
SOURCES OF FUNDS
General Funds - 2,06,04,426 2,06,04,426 - 3,50,03,977 3,50,03,977
Corpus Funds 22,28.865 6,05,22,112 6,27,50,977 21,83,788 6,05,22,112 6,27,05,900
Restricted Funds 12,32,98,967 1,59,07,682 __ 13,92,06,649 12,32,98,966 1,59,07,681 13,92,06,647
9,70,34,220 22,25,62,052 12,54,82,754 11,14,33,770 23,69, 16,524
APPLICATION OF FUNDS
Property, Plant and Equipment
Gross block 8,02, 19,982 2,33,66,505 10,35,86,487 7,60,21,414 1,78,19,169 9,38,40,583
Less: Accumulated depreciation 5,04,70,912 1,20,77,301 6,25,48,213 4,50,95,790 90,51,290 5,41,47,080
Net block 2,97,49,070 1,12,89,204 ” 4,10,38,274 3,09,25,624 87,67,879 3,96,93,503
Capital work-in-progress - - - -
2,97,49,070 1,12,89,204 4,10,38,274 3,09,25,624 87,67,879 3,96,93,503
Current assets, loans and advances
Cash and Bank balance 14,62,71,755 14,67,45,982 29,30,17,737 20,51,54,856 44,92,00,707 65,43,55,563
Loans and Advances 1,45,88,626 1,76,80,413 3,22,69,039 2,54,49,652 4,70,40,670 7,24,90,322
16,08, 60,381 16,44,26,395 32,52,86,776 23,06,04,508 49,62,41,377 72,68,45,885
Less: Current liabilities and provisions
Current Liabilities and Provisions 6,50,81,619 7,86,81,379 14,37,62,998 13,60,47,378 39,35,75,486 52,96,22,864
Net current assets 9,57,78,762 8,57,45,016 18,15,23,778 9,45,57,130 10,26,65,891 19,72,23,021
9,70,34,220 22,25,62,052 12,54,82,754 11,14,33,770 23,69,16,524
Income and expenditure account for the year ended March 31, 2023
(All amounts in Rupees)
As at March 31, 2023 As at March 31, 2022
FCRA NFCRA Total FCRA NFCRA Total
12,54,82,754 11,14,33,770 23,69,16,524 12,47,79,854 10,62,53,860 23,10,33,714
B ) Income
Grants from Plan International Inc (net of expenses incurred on behalf of Plan
International Inc and other affiliates) 50,95,45,780 - 50,95,45,780 82,49,40,132 - 82,49,40,132
Corporate donations 11,55,36,808 32,05,07,117 43,60,43,925 12,55,19,612 34,71,10,207 47,26,29,819
Institutional donations 16,40,35,750 60,46,52,829 76,86,88,579 4,43,69,377 48,46,67,963 52,90,37,340
Individual donations 1,12,379 2,62,90,657 2,64,03,036 7,85,475 3,81,23,171 3,89,08,646
Interest income 1,471 89,96,940 89,98,411 6,37,802 29,72,622 36,10,424
Corpus fund 45,077 - 45,077 87,483 42,31,751 43,19,234
Others - - - - - -
96,04,47,543 1,74,97,24,808 99,63,39,881 87,71,05,714 1,87,34,45,595
C ) Expenditure
Payment to NGO partners - 34,21,51,471 34,21,51,471 - 32,28,13,093 32,28,13,093
Salaries and related costs 23,74,30,897 13,19,41,465 36,93,72,362 22,52,39,776 10,94,07,553 33,46,47,329
Contribution to provident and other funds 3,47,75,554 1,72,70,850 5,20,46,404 2,73,65,890 1,07,42,151 3,81,08,041
Staff recruitment and relocation expenses 8,46,181 3,14,792 11,60,973 7,92,771 89,829 8,82,600
Travelling 2,21,35,900 2,87,18,398 5,08,54,298 85,30,144 83,55,392 1,68,85,536
Vehicle hire, running and maintenance expenses 89,62,055 66,50,050 1,56,12,105 57,79,991 25,38,411 83,18,402
Trainings, conferences and workshops 2,89,97,659 3,22,66,981 6,12,64,640 1,17,39,451 71,30,811 1,88,70,262
Depreciation 55,42,242 35,59,435 91,01,677 43,75,286 22,18,462 65,93,748
Postage, telephone and telegram 38,04,569 15,82,324 53,86,893 37,45,647 10,26,497 47,72,144
Rent 1,86,73,857 1,49,59,375 3,36,33,232 1,83,39,284 68,49,500 2,51,88,784
Repairs and maintenance:
- Building 60,49,058 20,90,131 81,39,189 39,05,053 27,91,836 66,96,889
- Others 1,79,20,427 88,90,555 2,68,10,982 1,04,31,279 34,67,990 1,38,99,269
Fund raising expenses - 1,15,79,717 1,15,79,717 - 2,16,84,201 2,16,84,201
Publications - - - 680 - 680
Printing and stationary 90,73,642 38,86,173 1,29,59,815 91,91,053 20,71,844 1,12,62,897
Legal and professional charges 56,02,729 61,11,024 1,17,13,753 50,83,111 45,10,002 95,93,113
Program related expenditure 38,59,77,619 36,03,11,442 74,62,89,061 65,47,37,496 36,35,51,390 1,01,82,88,886
Electricity and water 23,34,750 13,67,390 37,02,140 17,49,274 5,80,629 23,29,903
Insurance 9,09,401 5,46,748 14,56,149 28,33,415 15,56,810 43,90,225
Bank charges 1,25,529 4,61,071 5,86,600 17,97,380 5,39,403 23,36,783
Loss on disposal of Fixed Assets 70,118 1,87,701 2,57,819 - - -
78,92,32,187 97,48,47,093 1,76,40,79,280 99,56,36,981 87,19,25,804 1,86,75,62,785
D ) Excess of income over expenditure for the year -1,43,99,550 §1,79,910 58,82,810
58

--- Page 59 ---
M8 ss Grants from Plan International Inc 29%
| Corporate donations 25%
|| Institutional donations 44%
IN Individual Donations 1%
Income ratios by FC vs NFC funds
, | FCRA Income 45%
MS sNFCRA Income 55%
Expenditure ratios
Plan India aims to maximise expenditure on programming and impact in the field,
but needs to balance this with spending on fundraising and administration. Of our
total expenditure in FY 22-23, 93.5% of the spend was against the programmes
and 6.5% was for the administrative and fund raising activities.
\ | fs Program expenses 93.5%
| | Administration expenses 5.1%
!)) Fundraising expenses 1.4%
Program expenses ratios by thematic areas
} | Inclusive and Quality Education 19%
r | Skills and Opportunities for Youth Employment 9%
and Entreprenership °
(9s Sexual and Reproductive Health and Rights 47%
|| Protection from Gender Based Violence 8%
|| Inclusive and Quality Nutrition 4%
| Resilience in Emergencies 12%
59

--- Page 60 ---
60

--- Page 61 ---
No text found on this page.


--- Page 62 ---
INTERNATIONAL
www.planindia.org
PLAN INDIA
1, Community Centre, Zamrudpur, Kailash Colony Extension
New Delhi - 110048, India
Tel: +91-11-46558484, Fax: +91-11-46558443
Email: planindia@planindia.org
FiPlanindiaNGO | (€Plan_iIndia | @Planindia ff Plan_India

