TABLE OF CONTENT
Governing Board Members oO
Message from the Chair Emeritus
Message from the Chair & President
Message from the Executive Director
Our Journey
Our Purpose
Our Approach
Our Programme Reach
Our Impact
Plan India in Numbers
Strategic Thematic Priority 1: Inclusive and Quality Education
Strategic Thematic Priority 2: Youth and Household
Economic Security
Strategic Thematic Priority 3: Sexual and Reproductive
Health Rigths and Services and Maternal and Child Health
Strategic Thematic Priority 4: Safety for Girls and
Child Protection
Strategic Thematic Priority 5: Nutrition and Early Childhood
Development
Strategic Thematic Priority 6: Resilience in Emergencies
6 Plan India Impact Awards
Children’s Creativity Festival
International Day of the Girl Child(11 October)
From our Donors
Partners and Friends
Plan India in News
Awards and Recognitions
Financial Disclosure
List of Acronyms
About Plan International (India Chapter)
Oo oOo N OO
11
12
13
14
16
20
24
30
36
40
44
46
48
50
51
52
54
57
59
60| am happy to introduce the Plan India Annual Report for the year 2022-23. This year there has
been significant progress made by Plan India in attaining the national development agenda through
its work under various thematic interventions.
Our commitment to early childhood development, inclusive and quality education, youth
empowerment, and the protection of children, along with dedicated efforts to promote sexual and
reproductive health rights for girls and young women, has yielded positive outcomes.
The report shows our determination in the pursuit of gender transformative initiatives, showcasing
the positive impact generated within our communities, with a particular emphasis on the lives of
children, girls, and young women.
| extend my compliments and gratitude to our local communities, parents, self-help groups,
grassroots NGOs, donors, and, most significantly, the children, adolescent girls, and boys who have
been steadfast in their support and belief in Plan India’s vision.
Our achievements are a result of our strong partnerships and collaborations with national and
state government institutions, non-governmental organisations, academic institutions, universities,
technical resource agencies, corporate social responsibility partners, and community-based
organisations.
Their unwavering support has been pivotal in helping us achieve our goals and drive our mission
forward. | offer my sincere congratulations to the entire Plan India team for their excellent
contributions throughout the year.
As we look ahead, | am confident of their continued commitment to advancing gender equality
and contributing to the nation’s development, thereby positively transforming the lives of our fellow
community members.
Sincerely,
Rathi Vinay Jha
President, Plan India Governing BoardIMPACT ON CHILDREN,
ADOLESCENTS AND YOUTHS
89 Million) girls, boys, young women and men were
directly reached through various projects.
Under 6 year old children as programme Adolescent girls and young women
participants* of our Early Childhood as programme participants of our
Development initiatives. They acquired the Sexual and Reproduction Health Rights
knowledge, behaviours and skills to build initiatives. They became aware of the
relationships, learn, function effectively and harmful gender norms and stereotypes
independently and adapt to changes in the and accessed government health and
environment. wellbeing services.
3,17,167 18,716
Children, adolescents and youth as programme Young girls and boys under 24 years
participants of our Child Protection initiatives. were skilled through income generation
They were supported by building their life skills, initiatives and market linked vocational
resilience and self-protective capacities to help training and job placements.
them break the cycle of violence and reject
violence on children and girls.
4,08,136 16,774
School Children as programme participants of Persons affected by disasters supported
our Inclusive and Quality Education initiatives. with Humanitarian Relief and were able
They are on the path to complete at least 10 to build back better from the impact of
years of school education and learning. the natural disaster.
*Plan India prefers the use of the term “programme participant’ rather than “beneficiary” to count and report our outcomes.
13INCLUSIVE AND
QUALITY EDUCATION
sereneee eee
. .
—mw fl
—
Girls immersed in learning within safe and supportive school environment.
We have created a safe, protective and enabling learning
environment in more than 1,500 government schools where
Plan India has been implementing its inclusive and quality
education projects. Through our various interventions, we
have enabled children, particularly girls, to be enrolled,
retained and successfully complete their schooling.
We have built the capacities of school teachers,
strengthened the School Management Committees, and
worked closely with District Education Administrators to
achieve the goals of our Inclusive and Quality Education
programme. More than 1,000 primary, middle and secondary
schools were supported with improved teaching-learning
materials and school and classroom infrastructure.
16M8 ss Grants from Plan International Inc 29%
| Corporate donations 25%
|| Institutional donations 44%
IN Individual Donations 1%
Income ratios by FC vs NFC funds
, | FCRA Income 45%
MS sNFCRA Income 55%
Expenditure ratios
Plan India aims to maximise expenditure on programming and impact in the field,
but needs to balance this with spending on fundraising and administration. Of our
total expenditure in FY 22-23, 93.5% of the spend was against the programmes
and 6.5% was for the administrative and fund raising activities.
\ | fs Program expenses 93.5%
| | Administration expenses 5.1%
!)) Fundraising expenses 1.4%
Program expenses ratios by thematic areas
} | Inclusive and Quality Education 19%
r | Skills and Opportunities for Youth Employment 9%
and Entreprenership °
(9s Sexual and Reproductive Health and Rights 47%
|| Protection from Gender Based Violence 8%
|| Inclusive and Quality Nutrition 4%
| Resilience in Emergencies 12%
59